In our case, if we are talking about frustration from modern life that doesn’t mean that we are glorifying the past. I am absolutely sure that in many aspects modern human life and existence is much better than the middle ages, even in banal things like medicine or social equality, for example. For me frustration in modern life is more about how humanity uses the technological progress or so-called goods of civilization. Of course, there are a lot of examples of proper usage, but there are also a lot of examples, when people pervert even the greatest things and use it for their selfish purposes, for violence, lies, enslavement, control and wars.
This frustration is like when you are awaiting the utopic future from a 19s & early 20s fantast’s dream but receiving a Huxley’s “Brave New World”, if we use a maximalist comparison.
If you are interested in the theme of frustration in modern life you can also read some works of Erich Fromm. He wrote about the hope that industrial revolution will make humanity happy but again it was a fiction and unlimited consumption has not helped mankind to become happy.
Regarding the black metal and other bands that turn to the past then I think in most cases it is just a romanticisation. For example, the theme of medieval ages is very popular in black metal: all these stories about brave knights, heroic battles, pride and honor, ancient traditions etc . This all is very bright and interesting but does not have much in common with the life of an average middle-age peasant. All medieval traditionalists should stop dreaming and realize then if they were born in the middle ages then most possibly they would be not knights in shining armor, but peasants and it would be big luck if they would reach the age of 40 and would not die because of the plague or another infection.
Of course, in some cases we can find some really beautiful things from the past: a closer connection with nature, different ancient philosophy, practices and rituals that can really be useful for mental health and understanding of different processes, for example. Or art (you mentioned folk music) that was really sincere and not spoiled by capitalistic desire to earn money from it. But again, it is not about a regular ancient life.
So, I think that in most cases it is just a romanticisation and it is not bad to get inspiration in such a way – we just need to understand the real picture of the past to not mislead ourselves and create illusions.
